---
title: Philosophical discussions
draft: Draft
author:
- name: Maarten Steenhagen
  affiliation: university college london / university of antwerp
  email: m.steenhagen.09@ucl.ac.uk
date: 2015
... 

On several occasions, Collingwood expressed his disapproval of oral philosophical discussion, at least as carried out by his colleagues and contemporaries in Oxford. At the same time, on several occasions he makes clear that he does not disapprove of oral philosophical discussion as such. There's something wrong, Collingwood seems to think, with a particular way of engaging in philosophical debates. The crux here is an issue about philosophical method, and in particular an issue about how philosophers are to stand towards their interlocutors in discussions. I aim to show that Collingwood's claims about philosophical discussion are motivated by his conviction that understanding is constituted by a change in both parties – both in the one who understands, and in the one who is understood. Refutation and conviction, as Collingwood uses the terms, presuppose that the one who refutes, or the one who convinces, does not change her views. That, Collingwood thinks, frustrates philosophical understanding, insight, or progress. 

Collingwood seems to conceive of the "right way" of discussing matters philosophical with other people as being part of the proper method of philosophy. That he thinks there is a right way is manifest in his autobiography, yet there he does not expand on how we properly engage in philosophical discussion in more detail. All Collingwood mentions there is that he has tried to use it in practice, in his discussions with Oxford Realists, to little avail.

So how to conduct such discussions fruitfully, according to Collingwood? 

The treatment of philosophical discussion in the _Autobiography_ is perhaps most famous. It is however not the only place where Collingwood comments on these problems. Apart from various allusions and statements in the (unpublished) correspondence, I think we can find the most systematic treatment of the issue in _The New Leviathan_. There we find a discussion about 'academic' modes of thinking, which Collingwood takes to be closely tied to practices of make-belief and fiction.

The connection or association between 'academic discussions' that erect fictional positions or views and the way Collingwood's contemporaries engaged in philosophical discussions deserves further scrutiny. It seems to me that Collingwood thinks the tie is no accident, but flows quite naturally from what is (according to him) the sole positive doctrine of Oxford Realism:  knowing makes no difference to what is known. In the _New Leviathan_ Collingwood points out  that actual knowledge or understanding is only attained if there's a certain practical interest in one's subject matter, an interest that will lead us to change or modify the questions we pursue, and, it seems, an interest that as a consequence, an by the way we engage with our interlocutor, will affect what we set out to know or understand. 

>  The questions about a thing wherein the thinker has an interest will be different kinds of questions according to differences in this interest. A man will have a different theoretical attitude towards things other than himself according as his practical attitude towards them is different; and his practical attitude towards them will be different according to differences in his attitude towards his own actions. (18.2)

In _The New Leviathan_ Collingwood highlights Plato's distinction between _eristic_ and _dialectic_. To me it seems clear that here we find a way in to Collingwood's conception of the right way of philosophical discussion. Collingwood states un no unclear terms that 'academic discussion' makes the best example of an 'eristic' discussion (leaving it open that there are other instances). And so, assuming that there is a tie between the passages in the _Autobiography_ and the discussion of dialectic and eristic in _NL_, it is reasonable to suppose that there is a connection between the practice of discussing to convince or refute, or of general discussion, and the idea of an academic discussion. It seems that Collingwood thinks that eristic requires the construction of fictitious 'opponents', and that this typifies academic discussion. He thinks, then, we may infer, that eristic does not lead to understanding or knowledge because it is not practically engaged with the interlocutor or their points of view, and instead takes the discussion as an opportunity to construct a fiction that is placed opposed to one's pre-existing understanding. 

I want to suggest that Collingwood thinks that eristic requires us to argue about such fictional positions, and that as such it diverts interest away from the actual views and understandings of one's  interlocutors. This, he thinks, makes an increase in knowledge or understanding impossible. 

In the _Autobiography_, there's a brief mention of the role of interest in such discussions, when properly conducted. As Collingwood writes there, 

> when other philosophers discussed problems arising out of distinctions I thought false, or based on principles I thought unsound, I would enter into the discussion in precisely the same spirit in which I would enter into some ancient philosophical controversy, not expecting the disputants to be interested in my problems, but very definitely requiring of myself an interest in theirs. (p. 55)

As I suggested, Collingwood thinks all this flows quite naturally from what is (according to him) the sole positive doctrine of Oxford Realism:  knowing makes no difference to what is known. Precisely by constructing an imaginary opponent or position one's intellectual activity does not depend on the person one purports to address or understand, and as such may very well leave the views of one's actual interlocutor unaffected. But if that is a possibility, then we could not be genuinely engaging with their views, and could not come to reach a better understanding of them. Conviction and refutation, Collingwood thinks, are in an important sense solipsistic endeavours, intellectually or cognitively detached from reality. 

I think that this kind of connection is already manifest in the Autobiography, for example at the point where Collingwood recounts his conversations with Prichard. And it is no surprise to find Collingwood's observations about philosophical discussion in the chapters that focus on his encounters with Realism in Oxford. Realism, as he characterises it, rejects the assumption that knowledge is not independent from what is known. As a consequence, the doctrine leads to a warped practice of doing philosophy. Indeed, Collingwood sees the dominance of an eristic form of debate as having ethical and political implications as well (e.g. NL p. 207, and his interesting discussion of teaching moral philosophy in Oxford in the _Autobiography_ ). This makes sense of his charge that the Oxford Realism of his day paves the way for Facism.

This raises a question. If all this turns on assumptions about philosophical method, then why do we not find anything about philosophical discussion, about 'academic thought' and about eristic in the _Essay on Method_? That does seem to be the proper place to discuss this in detail, yet it does not seem to be present in it. There are two options, either it isn't in there, or it is. If it is, then it is at least not obvious, and not discussed in the same terms Collingwood uses in the later works I discuss above. 

In addition, the issue I present here suggests a further question, which I aim to explore. What can be salvaged of Collingwood's criticism of philosophical discussion even if one accepts the Realist outlook? I tentatevely suggest that the answer is: sufficiently much to make Collingwood's criticism worth taking seriously. I will connect this to current discussions in the discipline. 
